Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about The Unabomber.
It's a story of genius, terrorism,
isolation, technology, mathematics, and
the most expensive manhunt in FBI history.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
The 19th of September, 1995, was a
busy day for American newsstands.
From the early morning, up and down
the country, queues snaked around
the block as people waited in
line for their chance to read what
promised to be a bombshell story.
The Washington Post and the New York
Times had announced that they were going
to publish, in full, the manifesto of
a terrorist killer known only as The
Unabomber, a name that came from the
FBI’s internal code ‘UNABOM’, short
for university and airline bombings..
This decision to publish was
unusual for several reasons.
Firstly, newspapers don’t tend
to publish terrorist manifestos.
The US government has a stated policy
of not cooperating with terrorists,
and so agreeing to publish one’s
manifesto was unusual, to say the least.
Secondly, the manifesto
was 35,000 words long.
Not exactly coffee shop reading.
Thirdly, this manifesto was the
first time the general public had
heard anything from the Unabomber.
For 17 years he had been sending
anonymous bombs, and this was the first
time not just the public, but also
the authorities, would understand why.
The agreement to publish the manifesto,
made with the full approval of the
FBI, was a sign of desperation.
Whoever the Unabomber was, he had
managed to elude the authorities
for the best part of two decades.
His bombing campaign had started
in 1978, and had continued, off and
on, until 1995, killing 3 people
and injuring an additional 23.
And for the duration of the campaign, he
had never made any requests, not a single
demand, nor had he officially claimed
responsibility for any of the attacks.
To state the obvious, this is very
unusual; typically a terrorist, or
a terrorist group, will put forward
demands, or at least they will come
forward and claim responsibility for an
attack, to try to pressurise a government
into taking a particular action.
The Unabomber had done
none of those things.
Until now.
Earlier that year, earlier in 1995,
he had written a letter to The New
York Times promising to stop the
bombings if either the Times or the
Washington Post published his manifesto.
When this request was taken to the
FBI, it was carefully considered.
Sure, the United States does
not cooperate with terrorists.
But this wasn’t exactly an impossible
demand to agree to; he wasn’t asking
for prisoners to be released or for
any major change to government policy.
All he wanted was for his views to
be published in a major newspaper.
What’s more, after 17 years and
thousands of false leads, the
FBI was at something of a loss.
The bomber had taken meticulous care
to cover his tracks, all sorts of
psychological profiles had proven to
be fruitless, and despite spending
today’s equivalent of more than
$100 million on the investigation,
they were no closer to finding him.
So the publication of the manifesto was
a gamble—one last attempt to provoke a
reaction, to coax the killer into making a
mistake, or to encourage someone, anyone,
to recognise the voice behind the words.
Perhaps, just perhaps, someone might
read this manifesto and something might
click; a professor reading the style of
a former student or a parent recognising
their child’s voice from the page.
If it didn’t work, well, this would
be highly embarrassing for the FBI,
but they had run out of other options.
The manifesto began with the
now famous line: “The Industrial
Revolution and its consequences have
been a disaster for the human race."
And over the next 35,000 words or so,
it went on to spell out its author’s
worldview, and it was a worldview
unlike anything most readers had ever
seen printed in a daily newspaper.
It was bleak, uncompromising,
and fiercely argued.
The anonymous author—who signed his
letters as “FC”, short for Freedom Club—he
believed that modern technological society
was not simply flawed, but fundamentally
incompatible with human freedom.
Technology, he argued, did not
liberate us; it enslaved us.
The more complex our systems became,
the more dependent we grew on them,
and the more powerless the individual
became in the face of governments,
corporations, and machines.
This wasn’t the disjointed ramblings you
might expect from a mad serial killer.
It was disturbingly rational.
Logical.
Eloquent.
This was clearly the
work of a brilliant mind.
Yes, someone prepared to kill, a murderer.
But it was logically set out, touched
on political theory, sociology,
psychology, and history, and it
displayed a truly encyclopedic knowledge.
The Unabomber was extraordinary
in the literal sense of the word.
The manifesto was published, and, true
to his word, the bombings stopped.
The FBI and the government had
honoured their side of the deal,
and the Unabomber honoured his.
As the authorities hoped, the
phones started ringing off the hook.
Every lead was followed up
on, but it came to nothing.
However, in the small town of Schenectady,
New York, one man read the manifesto and
a terrible, sinking feeling came over him.
His name was David Kaczynski,
and he had been persuaded to read
the manifesto by his wife, Linda.
See, David had an older brother,
Theodore, or Ted, for short.
Linda had never met Ted, but
she had heard all about him.
The two brothers had been very close, and
although David hadn’t seen Ted for a long
time, they had kept in touch by letter.
Ted, so David believed, was living as a
recluse in an isolated cabin in the wilds
of Montana, cut off from the modern world.
From what Linda had heard about her
brother-in-law, well, it sounded
quite similar to what she had read
in the press about the Unabomber.
“Just read the manifesto”, she
told her husband. “For me”.
Reluctantly, David Kaczynski
picked up the newspaper.
Almost immediately, he recognised the
voice, the intense, almost obsessive
way of arguing, the deep-seated hatred
of technology, even certain specific
and unusual expressions and turns of
phrase that he knew his brother used.
His worst fears were confirmed; to
David Kaczynski, it was undeniable
that the author of the Unabomber’s
Manifesto and his older brother,
Ted, were the same person.
Instead of immediately going to
the FBI, he decided to first hire a
private investigator, then a lawyer.
He didn’t want to go straight to the
authorities; he knew his brother might be
in a fragile mental state, and he didn’t
want a raid resulting in him getting shot.
The private investigator compared writing
samples, samples of Ted’s letters to his
brother with the Unabomber’s manifesto.
She determined that it was
highly likely to be a match.
Early in 1996, David presented the
information to the FBI, but demanded
assurances that it would be an anonymous
tip-off; the last thing he wanted was
for his brother to know that it was him.
See, Ted and David had been very close,
so close, in fact, that David still
found it almost impossible to believe
that the boy that he had grown up
with—a shy, brilliant child who had
once spent hours teaching him maths
puzzles—that this boy could be responsible
for such cold-blooded violence.
So to understand why this was so
painful, and what might have caused
Ted Kaczynski to behave in this way,
we need to go back to his early life.
He was born in Chicago in 1942
into what seemed, from the
outside, like a perfectly ordinary,
hard-working, Polish American family.
His parents ran a small sausage
factory; they were not wealthy, but
they put a high value on education
and they quickly realised that their
eldest son was not like other children.
He was off-the-charts intelligent.
By the age of six, Ted was doing
complex arithmetic in his head.
By eight, he was reading advanced
scientific material for fun.
By ten, he had scored so highly on an
IQ test, getting a mark of 167, that
psychologists recommended he skip
not just one year of school, but two.
This decision would shape
the rest of his life.
Skipping grades might have made academic
sense, but socially it was a disaster.
Ted was smaller, younger, and
far more sensitive than the
older boys in his new class.
He struggled to fit in, struggled
to make new friends, and began
to retreat into the one world in
which he felt safe: mathematics.
His teachers described him as
“quiet”, “withdrawn”, even “timid”.
But in maths class he came alive.
Numbers somehow made
sense when people did not.
When he was just sixteen years old,
he was encouraged to apply to, and was
accepted into Harvard, becoming one of
the youngest students ever admitted.
For most families this would
have been a dream come true.
But for Ted, who was still very
much a child on an emotional
level, Harvard was not a dream.
It was overwhelming, isolating,
and sometimes traumatic.
During his first year, he participated in
a now-infamous psychological study run by
a Harvard professor named Henry Murray.
This study involved long, aggressive
interrogation sessions designed to
break down the participants’ beliefs.
Kaczynski would later describe
it as deeply humiliating, and
subsequent commentators have
suggested that it left lasting
psychological scars on the young man.
From Harvard he moved on to graduate
studies, eventually earning a PhD
in mathematics at the University of
Michigan when he was only 25 years old.
His thesis was so advanced that,
according to someone on his dissertation
panel, "maybe 10 or 12 men in the
country understood or appreciated it."
It seemed to his professors that he
was destined to become one of the great
American mathematicians of his generation.
And yet, in 1969, something
extraordinary happened.
At the age of 27, after accepting
a prestigious teaching position at
Berkeley, Ted Kaczynski suddenly resigned.
He walked away from a seemingly
secure academic career, from
a life that most people would
consider incredibly successful.
And he simply disappeared, or at least
withdrew completely from society.
He moved to a patch of remote land
outside the tiny town of Lincoln,
Montana, where he built, with his
own hands, a tiny wooden cabin.
No electricity.
No running water.
No telephone.
No car.
No neighbours.
Just trees, mountains, and silence.
It was here, in the solitude of the
Montana woods, that Ted believed
he could finally think clearly.
Here, he would be free from the
modern world he feared and hated.
Here, he could live entirely
independently, growing vegetables,
trapping animals, reading philosophy,
and writing page after page of
notes on the dangers of technology.
But this isolation did not
calm him; it radicalised him.
He watched the forests around him
being cut down by developers; he
saw aircraft flying overhead, he
heard the distant hum of industrial
progress, and grew convinced that
technology was spreading like a disease.
In his journals he wrote that the
modern world was “robbing people of
their freedom”, that industrial society
was “crushing the human spirit”.
By the mid-1970s, Ted Kaczynski had
transformed from a gifted mathematician
into an ideological extremist.
And in 1978, he made a decision
that would change everything.
He built a bomb.
It was hand-crafted from metal tubing,
wood, batteries, and homemade components,
it was placed in a parcel and left in
a hallway at Northwestern University.
When it exploded, injuring a
security officer, his 17-year
campaign of violence had begun.
Over the next decade and a half he mailed
or delivered a series of increasingly
sophisticated bombs, each designed to maim
or kill, each carefully constructed to
leave almost no usable forensic evidence.
And his methods were meticulous.
He sanded off fingerprints.
He used handmade wooden
parts to avoid traceability.
He built explosive
components from scratch.
He included false clues, misleading
markings, fake initials, random
pieces of metal or hair he had
found in public bathrooms, all
intended to confuse investigators.
Some bombs were disguised as parcels,
others as pieces of scientific equipment.
One of his early devices was planted
on an American Airlines flight,
causing smoke to fill the cabin and
nearly forcing an emergency landing.
Another killed a computer
store owner in Sacramento.
Another left a university
professor permanently disabled.
The authorities at first couldn’t figure
out the connection between these people.
Professors, airline executives,
computer store owners, there
seemed to be nothing linking them.
The connection was technology;
these were people Kaczynski believed
were responsible for advancing the
technological society he so despised.
When it became clear that this was the
work of a sophisticated terrorist, the
FBI launched what would become the longest
and most expensive manhunt in its history.
And yet, for years, they had nothing.
No suspect.
No motive.
No pattern they could reliably identify.
To the authorities, the Unabomber was
not simply dangerous; he was invisible.
And it probably would have stayed that
way if not for the publication of the
manifesto, and the moment David Kaczynski
recognised the voice of his brother.
Now, when the FBI received the
tip, they were initially skeptical.
They had received thousands of similar
leads over the years—tips from people
suspecting neighbours, colleagues, or even
family members—and all had been dead ends.
But this one was different.
The FBI had a number of letters and
documents written by the Unabomber,
and when they compared them to the old
letters and academic papers written by Ted
Kaczynski, the similarities were striking.
They used a technique called forensic
linguistics, which is the study of
language in a legal context, and the
experts noted identical usages of
certain uncommon words and specific,
idiosyncratic grammatical constructions.
With mounting evidence, the FBI
obtained a search warrant for
Ted Kaczynski's cabin in Montana.
They knew that they had to catch him
red-handed; other than the similarities
in writing styles, they had nothing
concrete linking him to the crimes.
The cabin was their last hope.
On April 3, 1996, a team of FBI
agents arrived on the scene.
Posing as forestry workers,
they knocked on the door.
A dishevelled but importantly
unarmed Kaczynski opened,
and was swiftly arrested.
And a search of the cabin revealed
everything the FBI was looking for.
They found a wealth of evidence, including
four fully constructed and ready-to-mail
bombs, and the original, handwritten
draft of the 35,000-word manifesto.
Alongside this, there were detailed
journals containing the formula and
process for every single one of the 16
bombings the Unabomber had carried out.
These weren’t written in
plain English, though.
Kaczynski had encrypted them using an
incredibly sophisticated system of codes,
but fortunately for the authorities,
the ciphers, the codes to decipher the
system, were also found in the cabin.
Ted Kaczynski was arrested.
The man who had been the subject
of the most complex, long-running,
and expensive investigation in US
history was finally in custody.
But the story doesn't end there.
The trial, and the ultimate fate of
this boy-genius-turned-terrorist,
would raise profound questions about
responsibility, mental health, and
the very nature of modern society.
Ted Kaczynski never denied
being The Unabomber, but his
legal defense was complicated.
His lawyers wanted to argue that
he was mentally ill and therefore
not responsible for his actions.
They wanted him to plead "not
guilty by reason of insanity."
In other words, he was crazy.
Kaczynski, however, fiercely
objected to this strategy.
He saw himself not as a madman,
but as a rational revolutionary.
To be declared insane would invalidate
his manifesto and his entire political
philosophy, and the entire reason he
had embarked on his bombing campaign
was for his views to be taken seriously.
He was so determined that he eventually
tried to fire his own defense team
and represent himself in court.
In the end, he avoided a potentially
lengthy and highly publicised
trial by accepting a plea bargain.
On January 22, 1998, Ted Kaczynski
pleaded guilty to all charges.
In exchange for avoiding the
death penalty, he was sentenced to
eight consecutive life sentences
without the possibility of parole.
He was transferred to the Supermax
prison in Florence, Colorado, where he
lived out the remainder of his days,
much of it in solitary confinement,
before finally killing himself in
June of 2023, at the age of 81.
And there is another twist to this story.
His bombing spree started in 1978,
in a world we might today consider
relatively free from technology.
Today, where technology is infinitely
more entrenched in every aspect of
our lives than 50 years ago, his
anti-technology message is able to
spread ever further and faster, and is
reaching more people than ever before.
Whether it’s simply that his manifesto is
easily accessible online, or that people
are making TikToks about “Uncle Ted was
right”, his worldview and philosophy is
becoming more and more well-known through
the very technology he sought to destroy.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on The Unabomber.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I'd love to know what
you thought of this episode.
For the members among you, you can head
right into our community forum, which is
at community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.